Brothers and sisters, in today’s
Gospel we heard about the blind man
Bartimaeus, sitting by the roadside, who
caught sight of—really, who heard—Jesus
passing by as He was leaving Jericho.
Jericho, in translation—erm—in
Hebrew, means “moon”, which
also suggests darkness.
And of course you know that parable, that
on the road to Jericho they beat up the
man who was going down, and the Samaritan
came to him; and Jericho was marked out
as a city of darkness, a city of evil.
And it’s right there, in that city, that
the blind man is sitting by the roadside.
In the Bible, sitting
points to two attitudes.
It can mean listening, but then
it’s always said that someone got
up afterwards; teaching, on the
other hand, was done sitting down.
Yet it can also point to
resurrection, when someone rises,
and it can also point to death.
And you see, for anyone to reach
Jerusalem, they had to come
out of Jericho, out of the city
of darkness, and pass through.
And that blind man, Bartimaeus, has been
sitting there perhaps for years, and the
Bible tells us his father’s name exactly.
And we see something interesting
here: he is sitting by the roadside.
Is Bartimaeus a believer?
Remember that parable where it speaks of
the sower of God’s word: “The seed that
was thrown by the path did not bear much
fruit.” So, Bartimaeus is not on the path.
He’s sitting by the road, but
he’s not on the road in the
sense of moving forward in faith.
And today we can see and learn four things
that can help us in our spiritual life.
Bartimaeus may have been physically
blind, but perhaps many of us
here are spiritually blind.
And the first thing we can learn is that
when Bartimaeus heard that Jesus was
passing by, he began to shout, calling
on the name of Jesus to have mercy.
And we see that the whole
crowd is trying to silence him.
I don’t know why they were silencing him.
Maybe so he wouldn’t embarrass them;
maybe because they thought he wasn’t
worthy, that he didn’t deserve Jesus.
Maybe they thought he wasn’t a believer.
I don’t know, but the Gospel says they all
tried to shut him up so he wouldn’t shout.
Just think for a moment how, we believers
today, are sometimes pinned down.
We sit there, not moving, spiritually
blind, and all of it is suffocating
us, just as they tried to discourage
Bartimaeus from going, so he wouldn’t
be heard, so he wouldn’t shout.
Many of us today are sitting like that;
we haven’t even the strength to shout,
we haven’t the strength to cry out,
because we’ve been discouraged—maybe
by certain examples, maybe by our
own life, maybe by circumstances—but
something is constantly choking us.
Something is always stopping us
from coming to Jesus, and we can all
often see it in our lives: there’s
always something that crops up to
stand between us and Jesus, so that
sometimes you don’t even have the
strength to shout out and go to Him.
But he pulled himself together,
gathered his strength, and cried out.
And the Gospel says that he leapt up.
I’m asking a question of all of us:
when are we going to leap up—when
are we going to shake ourselves
out of our comfort, out of our
lukewarmness—when are we going to break
free from our fears, from our doubts?
You see, we can learn a lot from
this: precisely when things are hard,
precisely when it’s hardest for you, you
need to cry out, you need to cry out.
A similar prayer to the one he was
saying was taken up in the Eastern
Churches on their prayer beads,
praying with a similar phrase: “Jesus,
Son of David, have mercy on me,”
and it’s simply repeated like that.
We, our Church has the rosary, but you
see we have ways, when it’s hard, when
you’re pinned down, when you can’t get
up, to shout, to cry out, to plead.
And it’s precisely in those moments
that a person mustn’t lose heart.
You need to be strong enough to cry
out from the very depths of your heart.
And God hears that prayer.
When people ask what a powerful prayer
is, it’s the one that comes from the
depths of your heart, the one that
rises from the cry of your soul.
Imagine how a blind man must have felt.
He had nothing left to lose.
Jesus was his last chance.
Jesus was his last remedy.
Maybe you too have come to the
edge, where you think there’s no one
left, no one you can truly turn to.
Let’s be realistic, people: we all
end up disappointing one another.
Today we swear by love and friendship,
and then a year later—three,
five—everything falls apart.
There’s nothing anywhere.
All of us experience being pinned
down, but we mustn’t stay that way.
So today, here, we learn from Bartimaeus:
when others try to silence you, when
others put pressure on you, or when
you’ve allowed something yourself to pin
you to the ground—shout, shout, “Jesus,
Son of David, have mercy on me.” Look,
here’s the second thing we can learn.
He jumped up and threw off his cloak.
That cloak was everything he had:
his security, his bed, his home.
That cloak meant everything to him.
But when he heard that Jesus
was passing by, so that he could
move, he threw that cloak off.
When will we be ready to throw
off the cloak of false beliefs,
the cloak of sin that holds us
back, the cloak of fear and doubt?
When will we take it off?
That’s why we can’t draw near to
Jesus, because spiritually we’re
constantly wearing some kind of cloak
that we don’t want to let go of.
This is such a wonderful example today,
because when we remember that rich young
man, there’s that story where the rich
young man comes to Jesus and says, “Lord,
what must I do to enter the Kingdom of
Heaven?” And then he lists it all: I do
this, I do this, I do this — everything’s
great, according to the commandments.
And then Jesus says to him, “You’re
only missing one more thing.”
“Go and sell what you have.” And
he was rich. But you see, the
problem in his heart wasn’t wealth
itself, it was his attachment to it.
And the Gospel ends by saying that the
young man went away from Jesus sad.
Yet here we see Bartimaeus: his only
treasure, his security, that one
cloak—he takes it off and throws it away.
So now let’s think about us believers
today: how often do we say we believe
in God, and yet there are certain things
we simply don’t want to let go of.
We think we can’t live without sin.
We don’t want to cast it off.
We cling to security, career,
selfishness, appearance—whatever you like.
How many of these cloaks do we all have,
saying we’re believers, yet we don’t take
them off, we don’t want to let them go.
We feel safer wrapped up in them.
And yet God’s word calls us to
this, and so does the example
of this blind man, Bartimaeus.
Cast off everything that holds
you back from coming to Jesus.
Cast off everything that gives
you a false sense of security.
Here the Lord wants to teach
us trust — trust in him.
If you are seeking me, you
leave everything else behind.
And that is the story of every
saint, every apostle, every believer.
Either Jesus is in first
place, or he isn’t.
And then tonight we can reflect:
what is my cloak — the one I
no longer want to take off?
The third thing we can learn from
this blind man: he is blind, and the
Gospel says he wasn’t blind from birth.
He’s blind, he’s ill.
Imagine what it’s like to be like
that, alone, seeing nothing, sitting
by the roadside, people mocking you.
And at first the man thought—when
he tore himself away, sprang up,
threw all that off, and came before
Jesus—what did he say to him?
It’s not like the way we pray, is it?
“Give me this, give me that,
give me this, give me that.”
And the third thing we need to learn
from Bartimaeus: what did he call Jesus?
“Teacher, Teacher.” The third thing
we need to learn about our attitude
before God: he didn’t come and say,
“Jesus, please, quickly touch my eyes
so I can see,” but he addressed him:
“Teacher.” Mary Magdalene addressed
Jesus with the very same word as
well, even though she was a sinner.
Jesus – she was blind in the sense that
she didn’t recognise the risen Jesus
until he spoke to her, and then she
said the very same word: “Teacher.”
And she was spiritually blind,
so she didn’t recognise Jesus.
But what’s crucial, both with Mary
Magdalene and with Bartimaeus, is that
they take the stance of a disciple.
They take the stance of a disciple.
They don’t immediately
push their own agenda.
We, we often come before God as if
he’s a jukebox: give me this, give
me that, fulfil this, fulfil that.
Can I really say I’m a disciple of Jesus?
Do I let Jesus shape me?
Do I let him teach me, and do I walk
after Jesus if I’m his disciple?
Half of us would come just to
take something from him, for him
to do something for us, but we
wouldn’t want to be his disciples.
And to be a true disciple of God means
coming before God with that attitude:
that you turn to him first out of love,
and God will add all the rest to you.
That’s why the third thing we should
learn, every time we come into God’s
presence, is to take the posture of a
disciple: “Speak, Teacher.” Because each
time the Teacher answered Mary Magdalene,
Bartimaeus, and everyone in Holy
Scripture: “Your faith has saved you.”
Because for Jesus, neither Mary
Magdalene’s sins nor Bartimaeus’
illness were the problem; rather, he
saw in them that they had faith in him.
That’s why they address him:
“Teacher.” And we too should
always have that same attitude.
We come before our Teacher and
allow ourselves to be shaped.
That Teacher will bless me and change me.
However, we can see it in
what follows in this Gospel.
OK, he takes up this attitude: “Teacher.”
I’ve just mentioned Jesus’ path. He’s
leaving Jericho—where is he going?
Jesus is heading for Jerusalem,
and we know what awaits him there:
the triumphant entry, then he’ll
be arrested, then imprisoned, then
killed; and in the end Jesus will
rise again and ascend into heaven.
In other words, you take up the stance
of a disciple: you no longer choose
your own path, but follow the Lord.
And the Lord said: “All those who
follow me, who are my disciples, will
have to go through something similar.”
Where do we see that this blind man
truly received spiritual sight? In
this: not only physically, but in the
fact that he became Jesus’ disciple
and set off after Jesus to Jerusalem.
Nowhere does it say there that he
went back to look for his cloak.
It doesn’t say that anywhere; it
says he left everything and set
off after Jesus, following Jesus.
I was explaining this posture
of sitting and then getting up.
Who else does Jesus come to?
He’s sitting, it says, in the tax
booth, and Jesus says to him, “Come,
follow me.” Jesus offers every one
of us the chance to go with him.
However, we often grope about in the dark.
We say we belong to Jesus, yet
we walk like geese in the fog.
So often we’re lost, and
still we say we’re Jesus’ own.
If Jesus is shining in our
hearts, we cannot lose our way.
And even if we go through what the Lord
himself went through, we know that in
the end the outcome is the Resurrection.
Let them crucify us, let them hate us,
let them spit on us and call us names.
This is what Jesus asks of
his disciples: to follow him.
And I’m sure that in this church
Jesus won’t send any of us
down a road we can’t endure.
Jesus hasn’t put any of us on the path
we’re on right now if we can’t bear it.
Be a disciple right where you are, on the
road you’re on, and let him shape you.
And you see, I’ve just said it:
sometimes we’re spiritually blind.
Yet God is so good, he blesses us
so much, life can be so beautiful
at times, and we see nothing because
we’re blind, because we’re blind.
Maybe we can see physically, but
spiritually we don’t see anything at all.
Brother and sister, we’re blind
when we say we’re not capable
of a relationship with the Lord.
Brothers and sisters, we are blind
when we say there is no good.
Brothers and sisters, we are blind when
we say that God doesn’t care about me.
Brothers and sisters, we are blind
when we say God can’t forgive me.
And how often we are that blind,
because we don’t see the good.
Brothers and sisters, we are blind because
sometimes we follow evil, we don’t see.
And that’s why sometimes we need,
like Bartimaeus, to leap up and
cry out: “Jesus, Son of David,
have mercy on me!” He is blind.
He gets up and goes towards
Jesus, but the Gospel says he ran.
A blind man, believing he would
reach Jesus, must have fallen
many times before he got to him.
He took the risk.
How many times do we get up and fall
too, but don’t stay on the ground.
If, as a blind man, he ran towards Jesus
to meet him, I believe he must have
fallen as he made his way to Jesus.
How many times do we
set off and then fall?
Get up and go again—seek
Jesus whenever you fall.
Don’t stay down when you fall.
Maybe Jesus is standing a metre from you.
Maybe he’s that close, but
everything is darkened for you.
Some people are so blind they
can’t see God’s providence,
his certainty, his protection.
Sometimes we’re so close to
God, and yet we don’t see Him.
We don’t see Him in the sacraments,
we don’t see Him present in life,
in our days as they pass by.
Have we seen Him anywhere
today, even if only nearby?
Sometimes we’re so blind we don’t see,
because we haven’t cast off the burden
of false belief, that cloak that’s on us.
That’s why God’s word today calls us to be
like Bartimaeus: to open ourselves to God,
to see again, to shout out, to cry out,
so that the Lord can then strip everything
from us and we can become disciples.
Disciples who listen to the Lord.
It isn’t always easy, I know.
It’s not easy to strip off
everything that holds us back.
Only if we truly want to, personally—just
think how much we’ve built up this
tangled cloak of false beliefs
we carry about ourselves: about
our own worth, our appearance,
our behaviour, our personality.
And the same with God, because in that
way Satan steals everything from us.
He’s happy for us to remain blind.
The consequence of sin is that it
distorts our image of God, that
we become blind and see nothing.
So even if we’re spiritually blind, that
isn’t the problem: the Lord will heal us.
We just need to cry out.
We just need to notice that we’re in need.
We just need to say it honestly to Jesus.
If he had mercy on Mary Magdalene,
if he healed Bartimaeus, why
wouldn’t the Lord touch you and me?
Why are we afraid of God touching us?
I know it’s sometimes hard
to listen to everything.
I know it’s sometimes hard to do
everything, but the most beautiful
thing you can do is to let God love
you, to let the Lord love your wounds
and mine, because God’s love heals.
That’s it — that’s the
light that opens our eyes.
That’s the light that gives
us the grace for the Lord to
shape us, to change our hearts.
Maybe, in life, we’ve so many times
placed our hearts in the wrong hands.
So many times our emotions have been used.
So many times we’ve been
spiritually infected.
So many times we may have carried
something traumatic within us.
Maybe life – our
childhood – has shaped us.
All of that is like a cloak of
life we all carry on our backs.
All of us.
You’re only human.
That’s why a person needs God,
needs His closeness, and shouldn’t
be afraid – afraid to click.
I think no one has the right to
complain about life, about God, about
everything that’s happening to them,
if they haven’t cried out sincerely.
Because there’s one thing I keep noticing
about people: they’re always moaning,
but they’ve never truly cried out.
They’ve never genuinely
screamed from the heart.
So does God really want us to
torment ourselves like that?
Does God really care that
your life and mine fall apart?
Does God really want chaos to rule in my
life and yours, in your family and mine?
No.
It matters to Satan.
So why don’t we cry out sincerely?
Why don’t we talk it through with Jesus?
About the state we’re in.
Bartimaeus realised what condition
he was in: I’m ill, I’m blind.
Do we believers realise
what state we’re in?
I’ve got the feeling some don’t.
Some people come, they talk and
talk and talk, but they say nothing
about themselves and they don’t
see their own condition — and
it’s very chaotic, very alarming,
very bad — but they don’t see it.
And that’s where we need to ask the Lord
to open our eyes, so that we can cry
out for the Lord to set us free from it;
to stop being people who only moan, and
instead bring it to Jesus, hand it over
to Jesus, and cry out to Jesus sincerely.
Perhaps that’s why we don’t cry out
— because we’re afraid we’d have to become
his disciples, that we wouldn’t be
able to go wherever we want any more.
Believe me, there are some who won’t open
their hearts to Jesus, won’t surrender
their lives completely, because we all
know from experience: if you’re open to
God’s grace and to the Holy Spirit, then
you’re no longer the one making the plans.
Then God leads you, and it’s like what
they said to Saint Pe–Peter: “And now
someone else will fasten your belt.”
So yes, that’s where the adventure with
God begins: that God makes you a joyful
person, that you see—really see—beauty,
that you see life, that you breathe in
life, instead of walking around as if
we’re just getting through the days,
as if life is so heavy that we can
hardly wait just to survive the day.
And I think that’s how I
feel right now, being in the
middle of organising all this.
But it’ll pass, it’ll all pass.
What matters is throwing
yourself into the arms of God the
Father and letting God lead us.
Look, ahead of us we’ve got adoration,
we’ve got prayer, Holy Mass.
Just delight in God, rest.
In this moment, switch off from
everything; take off your cloak,
take it off, and leave it down
there in front of the church.
Down there in front of the church there
are people keeping an eye on everything.
No one’s going to take your coat.
So, just be brave.
Amen.